CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

## How to contribute to Security Onion

First, thanks for being a part of the Security Onion community!  We appreciate any and all contributions!

#### Mailing List
The biggest thing that we need help with right now is supporting users on the [security-onion group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/security-onion).  Please see the [group guidelines](https://github.com/Security-Onion-Solutions/security-onion/wiki/MailingLists).

#### QA
We ask for testing before we release updates.  Please join our [security-onion-testing group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/security-onion-testing) and help us avoid regressions!

#### **Did you find a bug?**

* **Do not open up a GitHub issue if the bug is a security vulnerability in Security Onion**, and instead refer to [security](https://github.com/Security-Onion-Solutions/security-onion/wiki/Security).

* **Ensure the bug was not already reported** by searching on GitHub under [Issues](https://github.com/Security-Onion-Solutions/security-onion/issues).

* If you're unable to find an open issue addressing the problem, send a detailed email to the [security-onion group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/security-onion).  We'll triage the issue and then open a Github Issue if necessary.

#### **Want to help us work on issues?**

* We've put issues on the [Roadmap](https://github.com/Security-Onion-Solutions/security-onion/wiki/Roadmap) in a rough order of prioritization and scheduling.  Issues listed under a certain month are already being worked on.  Take a look at the issues under "Beyond" and see if there are issues you are interested in tackling.  Please keep in mind that some of these issues may be older and thus no longer accurate or applicable.  When in doubt, please feel free to reach out to the [security-onion group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/security-onion) for clarification and guidance.

#### **Are you looking for source code?**

* You can get the source for any of our packages by doing the following at a terminal (replacing PACKAGE-NAME with the name of the package that you want the source for):
```
apt-get source PACKAGE-NAME
```
Some of our packages have their own Github repos at [Security-Onion-Solutions](https://github.com/Security-Onion-Solutions).

Packages are built and hosted at [https://launchpad.net/~securityonion/+archive/ubuntu/stable](https://launchpad.net/~securityonion/+archive/ubuntu/stable).

Docker images can be found at [https://hub.docker.com/u/securityonionsolutions/](https://hub.docker.com/u/securityonionsolutions/).  Dockerfiles used to build those Docker images can be found at [https://github.com/Security-Onion-Solutions/securityonion-docker](https://github.com/Security-Onion-Solutions/securityonion-docker).

#### **Do you want to contribute to the Security Onion documentation?**

* If you want to add or make changes to the [wiki](https://github.com/Security-Onion-Solutions/security-onion/wiki), please send modifications to the [security-onion group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/security-onion) and we'll review and post.

Thanks! :heart: :heart: :heart:

Security Onion Team

Commit message:

add link to Launchpad info

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

## How to contribute to Security Onion

First, thanks for being a part of the Security Onion community!  We appreciate any and all contributions!

#### Mailing List
The biggest thing that we need help with right now is supporting users on the [security-onion group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/security-onion).  Please see the [group guidelines](https://github.com/Security-Onion-Solutions/security-onion/wiki/MailingLists).

#### QA
We ask for testing before we release updates.  Please join our [security-onion-testing group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/security-onion-testing) and help us avoid regressions!

#### **Did you find a bug?**

* **Do not open up a GitHub issue if the bug is a security vulnerability in Security Onion**, and instead refer to [security](https://github.com/Security-Onion-Solutions/security-onion/wiki/Security).

* **Ensure the bug was not already reported** by searching on GitHub under [Issues](https://github.com/Security-Onion-Solutions/security-onion/issues).

* If you're unable to find an open issue addressing the problem, send a detailed email to the [security-onion group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/security-onion).  We'll triage the issue and then open a Github Issue if necessary.

#### **Want to help us work on issues?**

* We've put issues on the [Roadmap](https://github.com/Security-Onion-Solutions/security-onion/wiki/Roadmap) in a rough order of prioritization and scheduling.  Issues listed under a certain month are already being worked on.  Take a look at the issues under "Beyond" and see if there are issues you are interested in tackling.  Please keep in mind that some of these issues may be older and thus no longer accurate or applicable.  When in doubt, please feel free to reach out to the [security-onion group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/security-onion) for clarification and guidance.

#### **Are you looking for source code?**

* You can get the source for any of our packages by doing the following at a terminal (replacing PACKAGE-NAME with the name of the package that you want the source for):
```
apt-get source PACKAGE-NAME
```
Some of our packages have their own Github repos at [Security-Onion-Solutions](https://github.com/Security-Onion-Solutions).

Packages are built and hosted at [https://launchpad.net/~securityonion/+archive/ubuntu/stable](https://launchpad.net/~securityonion/+archive/ubuntu/stable).  For more about the Launchpad build process, please see https://help.launchpad.net/Packaging/PPA.

Docker images can be found at [https://hub.docker.com/u/securityonionsolutions/](https://hub.docker.com/u/securityonionsolutions/).  Dockerfiles used to build those Docker images can be found at [https://github.com/Security-Onion-Solutions/securityonion-docker](https://github.com/Security-Onion-Solutions/securityonion-docker).

#### **Do you want to contribute to the Security Onion documentation?**

* If you want to add or make changes to the [wiki](https://github.com/Security-Onion-Solutions/security-onion/wiki), please send modifications to the [security-onion group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/security-onion) and we'll review and post.

Thanks! :heart: :heart: :heart:

Security Onion Team
