#summary Frequently Asked Questions

= NOTE: This FAQ was originally written for Security Onion 10.04.  Not all FAQ entries have been updated for Security Onion 12.04 yet. =

= What's the recommended procedure for installing Security Onion? =
[Installation Installation Procedure]

= How do I install Security Onion updates? =
[Upgrade Upgrade Procedure]

= Why do I get Snorby/Suricata/Bro errors after upgrading the kernel and pfring packages? =
[Upgrade Updating]

= What do I need to do if I'm behind a proxy? =
[Proxy Proxy Configuration]

= What is the password for root/mysql/Sguil/Squert/Snorby/ELSA? =
[Passwords]

= How do I configure email for alerting and reporting? =
[Email]

= Where can I read more about the tools contained within Security Onion? =
[Tools]

= How do I configure a BPF for Snort/Suricata/Bro? =
[BPF]

= Where can I find interesting pcaps to replay? =
[Pcaps]

= What are the default firewall settings and how do I change them? =
[Firewall]

= How can I add and test local rules? = 
[AddingLocalRules Adding local rules and testing them with scapy]

= Can I be alerted when an interface stops receiving traffic? =
[SensorStopsSeeingTraffic]

= What do I need to modify in order to have the log files stored on a different mount point? =
[NewDisk Adding a New Disk for /nsm]

= How do I disable the graphical Network Manager and configuring networking from the command line? =
[NetworkConfiguration Network Configuration]

= Where do I send questions/problems/suggestions? =
[MailingLists security-onion mailing list]

= I submitted a message to the security-onion Google Group.  Why isn't it showing up? =
https://code.google.com/p/security-onion/wiki/MailingLists#Moderation

= What's the directory structure of /nsm? =
[DirectoryStructure /nsm Directory Structure]

= Why does Security Onion use UTC? =
[TimeZones UTC and Time Zones]

= Why are the timestamps in ELSA not in UTC? =
[TimeZones UTC and Time Zones]

= How do I enable/disable processes? =
[DisablingProcesses Disabling Processes]

= I recently updated barnyard and now I'm not getting any Snort alerts. =
Some users running the Snort engine with the VRT ruleset are experiencing barnyard2 failing with errors like "Returned signature_id is not equal to updated signature_id".  This is due to some wrong entries in the database left by the previous version of barnyard2.  One of the barnyard2 developers wrote a MySQL script to fix these entries and I've packaged it into a shell script called so-snorby-fix-sigs and included it in the rule-update package.  If you're running the Snort engine with the VRT ruleset, please run so-snorby-fix-sigs and follow the directions (including shutting down all barnyard2 instances before proceeding with the database changes).

http://blog.securityonion.net/2014/06/new-securityonion-rule-update-package.html

= Ubuntu is asking if I want to upgrade to Ubuntu 14.04.  Should I? =
No, please do not upgrade to Ubuntu 14.04.  Security Onion is not compatible with Ubuntu 14.04.

= Will Security Onion move to Ubuntu 14.04? =
We have no immediate plans to move to Ubuntu 14.04.  Ubuntu 12.04 should be fully supported until April 2017: https://wiki.ubuntu.com/Releases 

= Ubuntu is saying that my kernel has reached EOL (End Of Life).  Should I update to the newer HWE stack? =
No, the PF_RING packages currently in our stable repo are not compatible with the Linux 3.13 kernel in the newer HWE stack.  We should be releasing new PF_RING packages in the next few weeks that are compatible with the Linux 3.13 kernel.

= What can I do to decrease the size of my securityonion_db (sguild) MySQL database? =
You can lower the DAYSTOKEEP setting in /etc/nsm/securityonion.conf.

= Why is my disk filling up? =
Sguil uses netsniff-ng to record full packet captures to disk.  These pcaps are stored in /nsm/sensor_data/HOSTNAME-INTERFACE/dailylogs/.  /etc/cron.d/sensor-clean is a cronjob that runs every 5 minutes that should delete old pcaps when the disk reaches your defined disk usage threshold (90% by default).  It's important to properly size your disk storage so that you avoid filling the disk to 100% between purges.<br>

= Why won't the ISO image boot on my machine? =
  * Did you verify the checksum of the downloaded ISO as described on the [Installation] page?  
  * Does your machine support 64-bit?  (If you're trying to run a 64-bit VM, then your 64-bit processor must support virtualization and virtualization must be enabled in the BIOS.)  If not, then you'll need to obtain a 64-bit machine to use our 64-bit ISO image (recommended) or use your 32-bit machine by installing Ubuntu 12.04 32-bit and adding our PPA and packages as described on the [Installation] page.
  * If you think your machine does support 64-bit, but you're still having problems with our 64-bit ISO image, try downloading the Ubuntu 12.04 64-bit ISO image and seeing if it runs.  If it doesn't, then you should verify your 64-bit compatibility.
  * If the ISO image boots, but the Live Desktop doesn't appear properly, it may be an issue with your video card.  Try the nomodeset option on the boot menu:<br>
http://blog.securityonion.net/2014/02/security-onion-12044-iso-image-now.html<br>
https://groups.google.com/d/topic/security-onion/UKE5-dqybQ4/discussion<br>
https://groups.google.com/d/topic/security-onion/51JZWXZfBho/discussion<br>
<br>
If that works but you are left with low resolution and you have an nvidia graphics chipset, you can do the following AFTER installation:
{{{
sudo apt-get remove nvidia-173
sudo apt-get remove nvidia-96
sudo apt-get install nvidia-current
}}}

= What does it mean if I have a high number of Sguil Uncategorized Events? =

Sguild has to load uncategorized events into memory when it starts and it won't accept connections until that's complete. 

You can either: 

- wait for sguild to start up (may take a LONG time), then log into Sguil, and F8 LOTS of events 

OR 

- stop sguild (sudo nsm_server_ps-stop) and manually categorize events using mysql (see http://taosecurity.blogspot.com/2013/02/recovering-from-suricata-gone-wild.html) OR lower your DAYSTOKEEP setting in /etc/nsm/securityonion.conf and run "sudo sguil-db-purge".

To keep Uncategorized Events from getting too high, you should log into Sguil/Squert on a daily/weekly basis and categorize events.  If you don't ever want to use Sguil/Squert, you can create an autocat to automatically categorize incoming events.  See /etc/nsm/securityonion/autocat.conf.

= Can Security Onion run in IPS mode? =
Running Security Onion as an IPS requires manual configuration and is not supported.  I talked about this on the Packet Pushers podcast:
http://packetpushers.net/show-95-security-onion-with-doug-burks-or-why-ids-rules-and-ips-drools/

= Why does barnyard2 keep failing with errors like "Returned signature_id is not equal to updated signature_id"? =
Please see:
http://blog.securityonion.net/2014/06/new-securityonion-rule-update-package.html

= Where can I get the source code? =
You can download the full source code for any of our packages like this:
{{{
apt-get source PACKAGE-NAME
}}}
where PACKAGE-NAME is usually something like securityonion-snort.  Here's a list of all of our packages:
https://launchpad.net/~securityonion/+archive/stable

= Why does my VMware image rename eth0 to eth1? =
Usually this happens when you clone a VM.  VMware asks if you moved it or copied it.  If you select "copied", it will change the MAC address to avoid duplication.  At the next boot, Ubuntu's udev will see a new MAC address and create a new network interface (eth1).  To fix this:
{{{
sudo rm /etc/udev/rules.d/70-persistent-net.rules
sudo reboot
}}}

= How do I change the fonts in the Sguil client? =

In the Sguil client, click the File menu and then go to "Change Font".  You can change both the Standard and Fixed fonts.

= How do I boot Security Onion to text mode (CLI instead of GUI)? =
In /etc/default/grub, change this line:<br>
{{{
GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT="splash quiet"
}}}
to:<br>
{{{
GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT="text"
}}}

Then run:<br>
{{{
sudo update-grub
}}}

For more information, please see:<br>
<a href="http://ubuntuforums.org/showthread.php?t=1690118">http://ubuntuforums.org/showthread.php?t=1690118</a>

In Security Onion 12.04, you can install our packages on top of Ubuntu Server (minimal installation, no GUI).

= How do I get Security Onion to recognize more than 4GB of RAM? =
If you have a 64-bit machine, use our 64-bit ISO image or use a 64-bit version of Ubuntu.

If you have a 32-bit machine, you'll need to use a 32-bit version of Ubuntu and then install the PAE kernel as described here:<br>
<a href="https://help.ubuntu.com/community/EnablingPAE">https://help.ubuntu.com/community/EnablingPAE</a>

= I'm running Security Onion in a VM and the screensaver is using lots of CPU.  How do I change/disable the screensaver? =
  # Click Applications.<br>
  # Click Settings.<br>
  # Click Screensaver.<br>
  # Screensaver Preferences window appears.  Click the Mode dropdown and select "Disable Screen Saver" or "Blank Screen Only".<br>
  # Close the Screensaver Preferences window.<br>

= I'm currently running Snort.  How do I switch to Suricata? =
{{{
sudo nsm_sensor_ps-stop
sudo sed -i 's|ENGINE=snort|ENGINE=suricata|g' /etc/nsm/securityonion.conf
sudo rule-update 
sudo nsm_sensor_ps-start
}}}

= I'm currently running Suricata.  How do I switch to Snort? =
{{{
sudo nsm_sensor_ps-stop
sudo sed -i 's|ENGINE=suricata|ENGINE=snort|g' /etc/nsm/securityonion.conf
sudo rule-update
sudo nsm_sensor_ps-start
}}}

= How do I add a new user to Sguil? =
You can add new Sguil user accounts with the following:<br>
{{{
sudo nsm_server_user-add
}}}

= I get periodic MySQL crashes and/or error code 24 "out of resources" when searching in Sguil.  How do I fix that? =
Recent versions of Setup should set MySQL's open-files-limit to 90000 to avoid this problem:
http://blog.securityonion.net/2014/02/new-securityonion-setup-package.html

If you ran Setup before February 2014, you can set this manually as follows.

First, stop sguil and mysql:
{{{
sudo nsm_server_ps-stop
sudo service mysql stop
}}}
Next, edit /etc/mysql/my.cnf and add the following in the [mysqld] section (please use hyphens not underscores):
{{{
open-files-limit        = 90000
}}}
Finally, start mysql and sguil:
{{{
sudo service mysql start
sudo nsm_server_ps-start
}}}
For more information, please see:<br>
<a href="http://nsmwiki.org/Sguil_FAQ#I.27m_seeing_error_code_24_from_MySQL._How_do_I_fix_that.3F">http://nsmwiki.org/Sguil_FAQ#I.27m_seeing_error_code_24_from_MySQL._How_do_I_fix_that.3F</a><br>

= How can I remote control my Security Onion box? =
A few options:
  * "ssh -X" - any program started in the SSH session will be displayed on your local desktop (requires a local X server)
  * <a href="http://www.xrdp.org/">xrdp</a> - sudo apt-get install xrdp - requires an rdp client
  * You can use [FreeNX] but we don't recommend or support it

= Why does the Snorby dashboard show all zeroes? =
Please do the following:
  * click "More Options"
  * click "Force Cache Update"
  * Dashboard will display "Current caching"
  * once that disappears, then refresh the Dashboard page

If that doesn't help, try rebooting.

If that still doesn't help, please see:
https://github.com/Snorby/snorby/issues/340

= I've forgotten my Snorby password.  How do I reset it? =
First, open the Rails console:
{{{
cd /opt/snorby/
sudo RAILS_ENV=production bundle exec rails c
}}}
In the Rails console, reset your Snorby password as follows:
{{{
u = User.find_by_email("foo@bar.com")
u.password="NewUnencryptedPassword123"
u.password_confirmation="NewUnencryptedPassword123"
u.save
quit
}}}
= Why isn't Snorby showing GeoIP data properly? =
Try forcing the GeoIP job to run by doing the following.  First, open the Rails console:
{{{
cd /opt/snorby/
sudo RAILS_ENV=production bundle exec rails c
}}}
In the Rails console, initiate the GeoIP job:
{{{
Snorby::Jobs::GeoipUpdatedbJob.new(true).perform
quit
}}}

= How do I disable Snorby? =
  # Disable Snorby in the Apache configuration:
{{{
sudo a2dissite snorby
}}}
  # Reload Apache configuration:
{{{
sudo service apache2 reload
}}}
  # Prevent Snorby worker from starting on boot by setting SNORBY_ENABLED=no in /etc/nsm/securityonion.conf.
  # Comment out the output database line in all barnyard2.conf files on all sensors:
{{{
sudo sed -i 's|output database: alert, mysql, user=root dbname=snorby host=127.0.0.1|#output database: alert, mysql, user=root dbname=snorby host=127.0.0.1|g' /etc/nsm/*/barnyard2*.conf
}}}
  # Restart barnyard2 on all sensors:
{{{
sudo nsm_sensor_ps-restart --only-barnyard2
}}}

= Why does Snort segfault every day at 7:01 AM? =
7:01 AM is the time of the daily PulledPork rules update.  If you're running Snort with the VRT ruleset, this includes updating the SO rules.  There is a known issue when running Snort with the VRT ruleset and updating the SO rules:<br>
<a href="https://groups.google.com/d/topic/pulledpork-users/1bQDkh3AhNs/discussion">https://groups.google.com/d/topic/pulledpork-users/1bQDkh3AhNs/discussion</a><br>
After updating the rules, Snort is restarted, and the segfault occurs in the OLD instance of Snort (not the NEW instance).  Therefore, the segfault is merely a nuisance log entry and can safely be ignored.

= Barnyard2 is failing with an error like "ERROR: sguil: Expected Confirm 13324 and got: Failed to insert 13324: mysqlexec/db server: Duplicate entry '9-13324' for key 'PRIMARY'".  How do I fix this? =

Sometimes, just restarting Barnyard will clear this up:
{{{
sudo nsm_sensor_ps-restart --only-barnyard2
}}}

Other times, restarting Sguild and then restarting Barnyard will clear it up:
{{{
sudo nsm_server_ps-restart
sudo nsm_sensor_ps-restart --only-barnyard2
}}}

If that doesn't work, then try also restarting mysql:
{{{
sudo service mysql restart
sudo nsm_server_ps-restart
sudo nsm_sensor_ps-restart --only-barnyard2
}}}

If that still doesn't fix it, you may have to perform MySQL surgery on the database "securityonion_db" as described in the Sguil FAQ:
<a href="http://nsmwiki.org/Sguil_FAQ#Barnyard_dies_at_startup.2C_with_.22Duplicate_Entry.22_error">http://nsmwiki.org/Sguil_FAQ#Barnyard_dies_at_startup.2C_with_.22Duplicate_Entry.22_error</a>

= Why does the Snorby worker fail with "ERROR: Process ID out of range."? =
The root cause is that the Snorby worker got into a failed state with the /opt/snorby/tmp/pids/delayed_job.pid file being empty. Snorby reads in the contents of this pid file and if it's empty, it results in "ERROR: Process ID out of range.".  Removing the empty pid file allows Snorby to start correctly.
{{{
sudo mv /opt/snorby/tmp/pids/delayed_job.pid /tmp/
sudo reboot
}}}
For more info, please see:
https://groups.google.com/d/topic/snorby/te4R1E6-VH4/discussion

We now delete the pid file at boot by default, so you should just be able to reboot to resolve this issue:
http://blog.securityonion.net/2013/11/new-snort-nsm-and-sostat-packages.html

= How do I access Xplico with a hostname instead of IP address? =
From Gianluca Costa:<br>
<br>
Xplico has embedded (in its PHP code) a Http-proxy, this proxy is used to show the web pages, emulating, for example, the original cache of the user.
By default the XI url must be an IP address (wiki: http://wiki.xplico.org/doku.php?id=interface#browser ), the only exception to this rule is the url http://demo.xplico.org (for obvious reasons).
If you use as url a name (not an ip) then XI give you a blank page, because XI searches your url in the decoded data.

To change this behavior you must modify the PHP code:<br>
 - file /opt/xplico/xi/cake/dispatcher.php<br>
 - replace demo.xplico.org with your host name (used in the url)<br>

= Why does Bro log "Failed to open GeoIP database" and "Fell back to GeoIP Country database"? =

The GeoIP CITY database is not free and thus we cannot include it in the distro.  Bro fails to find it and falls back to the GeoIP COUNTRY database (which is free).  As long as you are seeing some country codes in your conn.log, then everything should be fine.  If you really need the CITY database, see this thread for some options:<br>
https://groups.google.com/d/topic/security-onion-testing/gtc-8ZTuCi4/discussion

= What's the difference between a "server" and a "sensor"? =
box<br>
Definition: A physical or virtual machine running the Security Onion operating system.<br>
<br>
server<br>
Definition: A set of processes that receive data from sensors and allow analysts to see and investigate that data.  The set of processes includes sguild, mysql, and snorby.  The server is also responsible for ruleset management.<br>
Naming convention: The collection of server processes has a server name separate from the hostname of the box.  Security Onion always sets the server name to "securityonion".<br>
Configuration files: /etc/nsm/securityonion/<br>
Controlled by:  /usr/sbin/nsm_server <br>
<br>
server box<br>
Definition: A machine running the server processes.  May optionally be running sensor processes.<br>
Example 1: User runs Quick Setup on machine with hostname securityonion and two ethernet interfaces.  Setup creates a server and two sensors (securityonion-eth0 and securityonion-eth1).<br>
Example 2: User runs Advanced Setup and chooses Server.  Setup creates a server only (no sensor processes).<br>
<br>
sensor<br>
Definition: A set of processes listening on a network interface.  The set of processes currently includes Snort/Suricata, netsniff-ng, argus, prads, and bro (although this is in constant flux as we add new capabilities and find better tools for existing capabilities).<br>
Naming convention: $HOSTNAME-$INTERFACE<br>
Configuration files: /etc/nsm/$HOSTNAME-$INTERFACE/<br>
Example: sensor1-eth0<br>
Controlled by:  /usr/sbin/nsm_sensor<br>
<br>
sensor box<br>
Definition: A machine having one or more sensors that transmit to a central server.  Does not run server processes.  Pulls ruleset from server box.  (In some contexts, I refer to this a slave pulling rules from the master.)<br>
Example: A machine named sensor1 having sensors sensor1-eth0 and sensor1-eth1.<br>

= Where do I put my custom ELSA parsers? =
Place your custom ELSA parsers in a subdirectory of /etc/elsa/patterns.d/ and then use the following code to merge them:
{{{
# Become root
sudo -i

# Merge with pdbtool
PATTERNS_DIR=/etc/elsa/patterns.d/
DEST_PATTERN=/opt/elsa/node/conf/patterndb.xml
cp $DEST_PATTERN $DEST_PATTERN.bak
pdbtool merge -p $DEST_PATTERN --recursive -D $PATTERNS_DIR
}}}

= Why does the ELSA web interface not recognize one of my ELSA log nodes even though the APIKEY is correct? =
Could be due to clocks not matching between ELSA log node and ELSA web interface.  Please see: https://groups.google.com/d/topic/security-onion/K_5vWQpd8VM/discussion

= Why do apt-get and the Update Manager show tcl8.5 as held back? =
[tcl tcl notes]

= Why do I get the following error when starting Sguil? =
{{{
Application initialization failed: no display name and no $DISPLAY environment variable
ERROR: Cannot fine the Iwidgets extension.
The iwidgets package is part of the incr tcl extension and is
available as a port/package most systems.
See http://www.tcltk.com/iwidgets/ for more info.
}}}
This is related to the previous question.  See [tcl tcl notes].

= Why do I get segfaults when booting on VMware ESX? =
This is a known issue with Ubuntu 10.04 and ESXi 4.1 and is unrelated to Security Onion.  Please see:<br>
http://ubuntuforums.org/showthread.php?t=1674759<br>
https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/linux/+bug/659422<br>

= Why is the Snorby dashboard not displaying correctly?  Why do I have to restart the Sensor Cache job periodically? =
All known issues with the dashboard and sensor cache job have been resolved with the release of Snorby 2.5.1 in Security Onion 20120321:<br>
<a href="http://blog.securityonion.net/2012/03/security-onion-20120321-now-available.html">http://blog.securityonion.net/2012/03/security-onion-20120321-now-available.html</a>

= How do I run ntop on Security Onion? =
In the old Security Onion 10.04, Snorby was running on port 3000 (which ntop also defaults to).  In Security Onion 12.04, Snorby no longer runs on port 3000, so this shouldn't be an issue.

ntop defaults to port 3000, which is already being used by Snorby.  You can change ntop's port by editing /etc/default/ntop like this:
{{{
GETOPT="-w 0 -W 4000"
}}}
This will disable http and enable https on port 4000.  Thanks to Rod Green for the tip!

= Why can't I upgrade past version 20110628? = 

If your /etc/nsm/securityonion.conf says:<br>
{{{
VERSION=20110628
}}}
<br>
and if running the upgrade says:<br>
{{{
Your Security Onion installation is up to date.
}}}
<br>
then a previous upgrade from 20110628 to 20110709 was interrupted.  This upgrade changed the config file format from spaces to equal signs.  Edit the VERSION in /etc/nsm/securityonion.conf as follows:<br>
{{{
VERSION=20110709
}}}
<br>
and then re-run the upgrade.<br>