#summary Hardware requirements

= NIC =
You'll need at least two network interfaces: one for management (preferably connected to a dedicated management network) and then one or more for sniffing (connected to tap or span).  Make sure you get a good quality network card.  I've had good experiences with Intel.

= RAM =

RAM usage is highly dependent on the services that you enable and the network/bandwidth you're monitoring.  The following RAM estimates are a rough guideline and assume that you're going to be running Snort/Suricata, Bro, and full packet capture.  Your mileage may vary!

If you just want to quickly evaluate Security Onion in a VM, the bare minimum amount of RAM needed is 3GB.  More is obviously better!

If you're deploying Security Onion in production on a small network (50Mbps or less), then calculate your bare minimum as follows:
{{{
  1 GB for the core OS (no GUI)
+ 1 GB if you run a GUI
+ 1 GB if you choose to enable ELSA
+ 1 GB MINIMUM for each interface that you're monitoring
}}}
So if you want to run our ISO image (GUI), ELSA, and monitor one interface, then the bare minimum amount of RAM needed is 4 GB, but you should probably plan on at least 8GB RAM.  Again, more is obviously better!

If you're deploying Security Onion in production to a medium network (50Mbps - 500Mbps), you should plan on 16GB - 128GB RAM or more.  

If you're deploying Security Onion in production to a large network (500Mbps - 1000Mbps), you should plan on 128GB - 256GB RAM or more.  

If you're buying a new server, go ahead and max out the RAM (it's cheap!).  As always, more is obviously better!

= Storage =
You need LOTS of storage as Security Onion does full packet capture and it can fill a disk quickly. We have a cronjob that purges old pcaps once the disk reaches 90% capacity. However, if you have a small disk and/or are monitoring a large amount of traffic, you may fill that last 10% before the next purge. Additionally, the purge scripts are designed with the idea that you want to keep at LEAST 1 day's worth of full packet capture on disk, so they won't delete any pcaps with today's date on them. For example, suppose you are monitoring a 50 Mb/s link, here are some quick calculations: 50Mb/s = 6.25 MB/s = 375 MB/minute = 22,500 MB/hour = 540,000 MB/day. So you're going to need about 540GB for one day's worth of pcaps (multiply this by the number of days you want to keep on disk for investigative/forensic purposes). Note that this is just pcaps (other logs will take up additional storage), so you may want to round up to the next terabyte to ensure sufficient storage. The more disk space you have, the more log retention you'll have for doing investigations after the fact. Disk is cheap, get all you can!

= 32-bit vs 64-bit =
All of our packages are available in both 32-bit and 64-bit versions, but 64-bit is highly recommended due to the increased performance.

= Packets =
You need some way of getting packets into your sensor.  Usually this is via tap or SPAN/monitor port.  Here are some inexpensive tap/span solutions:<br>

Shear simplicity and portability (USB-powered):<br>
http://www.dual-comm.com/port-mirroring-LAN_switch.htm<br>

Dirt cheap and versatile:<br>
http://www.roc-noc.com/mikrotik/routerboard/RB260GS.html<br>

Netgear GS105E (requires Windows app for config):<br>
http://www.netgear.com/business/products/switches/prosafe-plus-switches/gs105e.aspx<br>

More exhaustive list of enterprise switches with port mirroring:<br>
http://www.miarec.com/knowledge/switches-port-mirroring<br>