#summary Some common troubleshooting steps

= Introduction =

Having problems?  Try the suggestions below.


= Details =

  * Are you running the latest version of Security Onion?
{{{
sudo -i "curl -L http://sourceforge.net/projects/security-onion/files/security-onion-upgrade.sh > ~/security-onion-upgrade.sh && bash ~/security-onion-upgrade.sh"
}}}
  * Check the [FAQ].
  * Search the mailing list: <a href="http://groups.google.com/group/security-onion">http://groups.google.com/group/security-onion</a>
  * Search the documentation and mailing lists of the tools contained within Security Onion: [Tools]
  * Run "sostat" for some diagnostics:
{{{
sudo sostat | less
}}}
  * If any of the NSM processes show up as failed, try restarting them:
{{{
sudo service nsm restart
}}}
  * Check log files in /var/log/nsm/ for any errors or possible clues.
  * If this is a sensor sending alerts to master server, is autossh running?
{{{
pgrep -lf autossh
}}}
  * If you're having problems with Snorby, check the log files in /usr/local/share/snorby/log/ and /var/log/apache2/ and see if its processes are running:
{{{
pgrep -lf delayed_job
}}}
  * Are you able to duplicate the problem on a fresh Security Onion installation?
  * Check the <a href="http://code.google.com/p/security-onion/issues/list">Issue Tracker</a> to see if this is a known issue that we are working on.
  * If all else fails, please join our <a href="http://groups.google.com/group/security-onion">mailing list</a> and send a DETAILED email including the output of the commands above.  Also consider the following when posing your question/problem to the group: <a href="http://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/bugs.html">http://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/bugs.html</a>