#summary Passwords

= OS root account =

Like other Ubuntu-based distributions, there is no root password. Your default user account has been given sudo permissions. Graphical utilities requesting administrative access should prompt for password; enter your user password. Command-line utilities that require administrative access can be prefixed with "sudo". For example, to add a user:
{{{
sudo adduser mynewuseraccount
}}}

= MySQL =
The MySQL root password is null to allow the NSMnow administration scripts to add/delete sensors properly. MySQL only allows connections from localhost.  If you need to look at the database manually, you can do so like this:
{{{
mysql -uroot
}}}

= Xplico =
We use the default Xplico credentials as listed here:
http://wiki.xplico.org/doku.php?id=interface

= Sguil =
Log into Sguil using the username/password you created in the Setup wizard.  Add accounts with "sudo nsm_server_user-add" and change passwords with "sudo nsm_server_user-passwd".

= Squert =
Squert authenticates against the Sguil user database, so you should be able to login to Squert using the same username/password you use to login to Sguil.

= ELSA =
ELSA authenticates against the Sguil user database, so you should be able to login to ELSA using the same username/password you use to login to Sguil.

= Snorby =
Snorby does not authenticate against the Sguil user database.  Log into Snorby using the EMAIL ADDRESS and password you specified in Setup.

== Reset Snorby Password ==
To reset your Snorby password, first open the Rails console:
{{{
cd /opt/snorby/
sudo RAILS_ENV=production bundle exec rails c
}}}
In the Rails console, reset your Snorby password as follows:
{{{
u = User.find_by_email("foo@bar.com")
u.password="NewUnencryptedPassword123"
u.password_confirmation="NewUnencryptedPassword123"
u.save
quit
}}}