#summary Quickly evaluating Security Onion using our ISO image

== If you just want to quickly evaluate Security Onion using our ISO image (based on Xubuntu 12.04 64-bit): ==
  # First, check the [Hardware Hardware Requirements] page.
  # Click the following link: https://sourceforge.net/projects/security-onion/files/12.04.4/
  # Download/record the MD5/SHA1 checksums for the ISO image. You can download the .md5 file or you can use the MD5/SHA1 checksums that Sourceforge displays when clicking the Information (view details) button to the right of the ISO image (it's a circle with an "i").
  # Download the ISO image from that Sourceforge page or via <a href="http://port111.com/securityonion-12.04.4-20140222.iso.torrent">Torrent</a>.
  # Once the ISO image download has completed, verify the checksum.
  # Boot the ISO image into the Live Desktop environment and then double-click the Install icon on the desktop.
  # Follow the prompts in the Xubuntu installer.  If prompted with an "encrypt home folder" option, DO NOT enable this feature.  If asked about automatic updates, DO NOT enable automatic updates.  Reboot into your new installation.  Login using the username/password you specified during installation.
  # Verify that you have Internet connectivity.  If necessary, configure your [Proxy proxy settings].
  # [Upgrade Install updates and reboot.]
  # Double-click the Setup icon.  The Setup wizard will walk you through configuring /etc/network/interfaces and will then reboot.
  # After rebooting, log back in and start the Setup wizard again.  It will detect that you have already configured /etc/network/interfaces and will walk you through the rest of the configuration.
  # Once you've completed the Setup wizard, use the Desktop icons to login to Sguil, Squert, Snorby, or ELSA.
<br>